[DESIGN] Number selection design refinements (#859)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/number-selection.md

of a range based on its start and end values.
Range-based selectors are not initially considered here.

In <a href="https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/842">PR #842</a>
@eemeli points out a number of gaps or infelicities in the current specification
and there was extensive discussion of how to address these gaps.

> The `key` for exact numeric match in a variant has to be a string. 

Reviewer: I don't see how this results from the requirements.

In some cases the key has to be a string, in other cases it is enough to be a number.
So the whole section below is only one option: IF we consider the keys to be stings, then ...

The idea that the key can be a number sometimes is not considered.

But it would be natural to map "...foo {}..." and "...|foo| {}..." in syntax to strings, and "...123 {}..." and "...|123| {}..." in syntax to numbers.

Author: The key has to be a string because the message is a string. The next line addresses this: if the key is a string, then the format of the string has to be clear so that it can be related to a number.

Reviewer: > The key has to be a string because the message is a string

I don't see how that one results from the other.
What says that keys and messages should be the same type?
And even if there is something, nothing stops us from changing it.

> * {{You have {$numRemaining} chances remaining (plural)}}
>```

As a user, I want the selector to match the options specified:
```
.local $num = {123.456 :number maximumSignificantDigits=2 maximumFractionDigits=2 minimumFractionDigits=2}
.match {$num}

> 120.00  {{This matches}}

Reviewer: The exact matching is rarely used, and not for situations like this.

It is usually handy for cases like "1 {this is the last day}" or "1 {you got the gold medal}"
In these cases the value itself is not even rendered in the message.

Cases like "1 dollar" / "1.00 dollars" are handled properly by the plural rules and they don't need exact matches (`one {{$amount} dollar" other "{$amount}  dollars}`)

Author: You might be thinking too narrowly about usage. Yes, a lot of custom messages are of the "You have no..." (aka `=0`) or "This is your last..." (aka `=1`) variety. But there are also many messages that _do_ insert the value (rather than forcing the translator to type it, e.g. "You received a reward when you accumulated {$points} points.") or cases where the message is tied to other (still-specific) values. "Many" is a relative term, of course. There are orders of magnitude fewer of these types of messages than plain `0`/`1` messages and orders of magnitude fewer of those than "insert number here" plural category ones. That doesn't make them unimportant.

In fact, to me that makes them _more_ important, since those messages should work consistently with user experience of simpler values. People make mistakes when they can't just do what they would do "normally".

120     {{This does not match}}
123.47  {{This does not match}}
123.456 {{This does not match}}
1.2E2   {{Does this match?}}
*       {{ ... }}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is an accidentally good example of the difficulty of defining number selection that accounts for formatting options:
```js
const nf = new Intl.NumberFormat('en', {
  maximumSignificantDigits: 2,
  maximumFractionDigits: 2,
  minimumFractionDigits: 2
})
nf.format(123.456) === '120'
```

In other words, at least in JavaScript it would not make sense for the `120.00` variant to be selected, because that doesn't match how `$num` would be formatted.

I think that defining the combined behaviour of specific number formatting options is, and should be kept, outside the scope of MF2. It is not our place to define how number formatting happens, or how the `:number` options are to be interpreted.

As far as I can tell, this leaves us with two realistic options:
1. Declare exact value matching to be implementation-specific.
2. Define exact value matching to not depend on formatting options.

I would prefer option 2 (hence my earlier PR), but I'd be fine with option 1 as well (effectively, what the spec currently does). I would not be fine with the excessive complexity required of the spec and implementations if we were to require matching to account for the formatting options in a predefined manner.

Author: Note that the matching behavior does not have to match the formatting behavior.

The JS result looks like a bug to me? Maybe it isn't actually a bug, but it looks like one, given how much effort was expended trying to get two fraction digits. The following produces `$120`, which seems... odd:

```javascript
const nf = new Intl.NumberFormat('en', {
  maximumSignificantDigits: 2,
  maximumFractionDigits: 2,
  minimumFractionDigits: 2,
  style: 'currency',
  currency: 'USD',
  currencyDisplay: 'symbol'
});
console.log(nf.format(123.456));
```

The existence of this feature/bug does not mean that MF2's definition of numeric matching has to be the same as the formatting output. It might be inconvenient for the implementer in JS, but that doesn't make it the wrong choice.

Do you disagree with the logic behind the example? 

Do you think that multiple keys should match in the example? Is there an example where `123.456` (i.e. exact numeric value) is the better match?

Reviewer 2: > Note that the matching behavior does not have to match the formatting behavior.

Really? You'd be fine with `120.00` but not `120` working as the key for a variant where the number would get formatted as `120`?

> The JS result looks like a bug to me? Maybe it isn't actually a bug, but it looks like one, given how much effort was expended trying to get two fraction digits.

It's not a bug; this result falls out of the combination of fraction and significant digits depending on the value of [`roundingPriority`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#roundingpriority), which by default prefers significant digit options.

> It might be inconvenient for the implementer in JS, but that doesn't make it the wrong choice.

While the implementation complexity does matter, I'm more concerned about the expectations of developers. In the very rare cases where a selection on an exact match on a value like 120 matters, I cannot believe that it makes sense to require a developer to be aware of the specific MF2 selection (but not formatting!) understanding of how the formatting options combine.

> Do you disagree with the logic behind the example?

Yes. I do not think it's right for us to enforce a specific meaning for number formatting options in MF2, which is required to say that `120.00` would be selected, but `120` would not be.

> Do you think that multiple keys should match in the example? Is there an example where `123.456` (i.e. exact numeric value) is the better match?

With this example, if we want to explicitly define which variant is selected, then I think `123.456` is the only available choice even if it's suboptimal. If we're not okay with that, then I think the next-best option is to leave it up to implementations to do exact matching, and then any of these variants could end up getting selected.

Author: > Really? You'd be fine with 120.00 but not 120 working as the key for a variant where the number would get formatted as 120?

I expect that the formatting behavior will be locale affected while the selection behavior won't be. What's important is that the message author can look at the message (and _only_ the message) and know how to specify the key for a given exact value. That knowledge, for default registry functions, should be transferable to any message/implementation.

> It's not a bug; this result falls out of the combination of fraction and significant digits depending on the value of [roundingPriority](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl/NumberFormat/NumberFormat#roundingpriority), which by default prefers significant digit options.

Okay. (I think it is weird, but see that it flows from the implementation of ICU's newer number formatter, which bundles everything up inside of "precision"). Since I think that using significant digits to perform number "trimming" (as I do in the example) is probably undesirable vs. actually mutating the value passed in, we should probably focus on the other details.

> Yes. I do not think it's right for us to enforce a specific meaning for number formatting options in MF2, which is required to say that 120.00 would be selected, but 120 would not be.

Because of the significant digits stuff? Or because you don't think the fraction digits should have any effect? I'm fine with saying `120` would be selected, if we decide to follow the `Intl.NumberFormat`/`ICU` behavior. If we did that, then the example would be:

```
.local $num = {123.456 :number maximumSignificantDigits=2 maximumFractionDigits=2 minimumFractionDigits=2}
.match {$num}
120.00  {{This does not match}}
120     {{This matches because significant digits wins}}
123.47  {{This does not match}}
123.456 {{This does not match}}
1.2E2   {{Does this match?}}
*       {{ ... }}
```

Although this is a better example:

```
.local $num = {123.456 :number maximumFractionDigits=2 minimumFractionDigits=2}
.match {$num}
123.46  {{This matches}}
123.45  {{This does not match because rounding}}
123     {{This does not match}}
123.456 {{This does not match}}
1.23456E2   {{Does this match?}}
*       {{ ... }}
```

> With this example, if we want to explicitly define which variant is selected, then I think 123.456 is the only available choice even if it's suboptimal. If we're not okay with that, then I think the next-best option is to leave it up to implementations to do exact matching, and then any of these variants could end up getting selected.

I don't agree because it _**is**_ suboptimal and because I'd have a hard time explaining it. For example, currency conversions often have many decimal places, but I don't want to show the extra precision available. Or I might want to turn the value's fractional part off for display. I shouldn't have to match `123.456` if the display is `123` I think.

Reviewer 3: I agree. It should match because it needs to match the visible digits (whatever the numberSystem / decimal/grouping- separators.

And it also goes for the integer case, as below

```
.local $num = {456 :number maximumSignificantDigits=2 minimumSignificantDigits=2}
.match {$num}
460  {{This matches}}
450  {{This does not match}}
456  {{This does not match}}
456.0  {{This does not match}}
*       {{ ... }}
```

Reviewer 2: > I expect that the formatting behavior will be locale affected while the selection behavior won't be. What's important is that the message author can look at the message (and _only_ the message) and know how to specify the key for a given exact value. That knowledge, for default registry functions, should be transferable to any message/implementation.

I agree with this. But I think we find ourselves on different paths starting from the same premise. One consideration that I include in my thinking is that we cannot assume that MF2 authors will remember the details of how formatting options interact with exact variant keys during selection, if and when that behaviour differs from what happens during formatting. And different implementations' formatters _will_ differ in their interpretations of options baskets.

> Since I think that using significant digits to perform number "trimming" (as I do in the example) is probably undesirable vs. actually mutating the value passed in, we should probably focus on the other details.

Do we have an example message using non-integer number selection that we could be considering? I continue to be concerned that we're trying to add excessive complexity to solve for an extremely rare edge case .

> > Yes. I do not think it's right for us to enforce a specific meaning for number formatting options in MF2, which is required to say that 120.00 would be selected, but 120 would not be.
> 
> Because of the significant digits stuff? Or because you don't think the fraction digits should have any effect?

Because defining exactly which of these matches (as opposed to `123.456`) requires defining a selection-specific meaning for these options that would be different from their meaning during formatting, and that this is so obscure no-one will remember it, or be able to predict it when writing a message.

> ```
> .local $num = {123.456 :number maximumFractionDigits=2 minimumFractionDigits=2}
> .match {$num}
> 123.46  {{This matches}}
> 123.45  {{This does not match because rounding}}
> 123     {{This does not match}}
> 123.456 {{This does not match}}
> 1.23456E2   {{Does this match?}}
> *       {{ ... }}
> ```

If `$num` were defined as an input, we could not guarantee that it would be formatted as `123.46`. For example, in JS it could carry with it a formatting option `{ roundingMode: 'floor' }`, which would mean that it'd get formatted as `123.45`.

Trying to support _some_ formatting options during selection will not produce predictable results. Trying to support _all_ formatting options during selection is impossible, because not all formatters work the same way. Supporting _no_ formatting options during selection is predictable, and uniform across all implementations. Yes, it does require mutating the input value in some edge cases, but those cases are made predictable.

> I don't agree because it _**is**_ suboptimal and because I'd have a hard time explaining it. For example, currency conversions often have many decimal places, but I don't want to show the extra precision available. Or I might want to turn the value's fractional part off for display. I shouldn't have to match `123.456` if the display is `123` I think.

If we want to ensure that the selected key and the formatted value match, then we must leave exact selection up to each implementation, because different implementations will not always agree in how they format a given value and its bag of options.

Author: > we cannot assume that MF2 authors will remember the details of how formatting options interact with exact variant keys during selection, if and when that behaviour differs from what happens during formatting

I disagree, from the perspective that they already kind of do. The behavior difference isn't that great and is mostly confined to locale-based formatting details (grouping, shaping, separator characters, etc.). Most of these folks are technical enough to know that `-123.45` refers to a negative number with a specific value. Is it really that unintuitive what that key means?

> If $num were defined as an input, we could not guarantee that it would be formatted as 123.46. For example, in JS it could carry with it a formatting option { roundingMode: 'floor' }, which would mean that it'd get formatted as 123.45.

How could an input variable have a formatting option pre-attached (`roundingMode` is an `Intl.NumberFormat` option, no?)? The formatting options are part of the formatter or some expression visible in the message. 

Note that the keys match use cases that the message author is trying to fulfill. Exact match keys need to "exactly" match the perceived value, which, as I think this thread shows, is influenced by formatting options.

> Trying to support some formatting options during selection will not produce predictable results. Trying to support all formatting options during selection is impossible, because not all formatters work the same way. Supporting no formatting options during selection is predictable, and uniform across all implementations. Yes, it does require mutating the input value in some edge cases, but those cases are made predictable.

This goes back to the transitivity discussion (still pending in the group). I think it's clear that some options are transitive and some not when it comes to formatting. I think the same can be said of selectors.

I think that the behavior of a given selector is _defined by that selector_. We are only talking here about the number selectors in the default registry. For sure other functions might work differently.

> Do we have an example message using non-integer number selection that we could be considering? I continue to be concerned that we're trying to add excessive complexity to solve for an extremely rare edge case .

Fractional selection is probably most common when working with currencies, percents, and unit values. I can write/unearth some examples later.

In the meantime... I'm fearful that we're not capturing this good discussion in the design doc (the purpose of this PR) 🙈

Reviewer 2: > > we cannot assume that MF2 authors will remember the details of how formatting options interact with exact variant keys during selection, if and when that behaviour differs from what happens during formatting
> 
> I disagree, from the perspective that they already kind of do. The behavior difference isn't that great and is mostly confined to locale-based formatting details (grouping, shaping, separator characters, etc.). Most of these folks are technical enough to know that `-123.45` refers to a negative number with a specific value. Is it really that unintuitive what that key means?

I don't think there's any issue about understanding what a key like `-123.45` means, but only about how it matches `:number` values. I think that can be made most intuitive by considering it a purely numeric value, and comparing it against the numeric value that's being formatted, and not taking into account some small subset of its formatting options.

> How could an input variable have a formatting option pre-attached (`roundingMode` is an `Intl.NumberFormat` option, no?)? The formatting options are part of the formatter or some expression visible in the message.

That's enabled by using "an implementation-defined type" as per https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/132d9c326271ce552cb485e07223f592fa51593e/spec/registry.md?plain=1#L340-L341 and effectively required to support attaching non-localizable options to number operands. In the JS implementation, you could do it like this:
```js
const mf = new Intl.MessageFormat('en', '{$num :number maximumFractionDigits=2}')
const num = { valueOf: () => 123.456, options: { roundingMode: 'floor' } }
mf.format({ num }) // '123.45'
```
This makes sense for options like `roundingMode`, which may be required to always use a specific value due to external constraints.

> Note that the keys match use cases that the message author is trying to fulfill. Exact match keys need to "exactly" match the perceived value, which, as I think this thread shows, is influenced by formatting options.

No, they don't. They need to _predictably_ match, so that a developer doesn't need to refer to the MF2 docs every time when they try to use exact matching. When dealing with a corner-case message like one needing to match `120` exactly while using significant-digit rounding, it's _okay_ for the developer to need to round that value outside MF2 to get the behaviour that they want, rather than doing all the work within the message -- the formatting of a message will always happen within some general-purpose programming language, and problems can be solved there. Remember, supporting "all grammatical features of all languages" is a [_non-goal_](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/docs/goals.md#non-goals) for us.

> When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the operand
> MUST be divided by 100 for the purposes of formatting.
> 
> > For example,
> > ```
> > .local $percent = {1000 :integer style=percent}
> > {{This formats as '10%' in the en-US locale: {$percent}}}
> > ```

Reviewer 2: This is wrong, thankfully it's right in [the spec](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/registry.md#percent-style).
```suggestion
When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the operand
MUST be multiplied by 100 for the purposes of formatting.

> For example,
> ```
> .local $percent = {1 :integer style=percent}
> {{This formats as '100%' in the en-US locale: {$percent}}}
> ```
```

```
.input {$count :number minimumFractionDigits=1}
.match $count

> 0.0 {{You have no apples}}
> 1.0 {{You have exactly one apple}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
0 {{You have no apples}}
1 {{You have exactly one apple}}
```

Author: This depends on whether the fraction digits apply or not. It doesn't matter, because the context is proposing a separate `:plural` selector.

Reviewer: There are traps if we don't compare numeric.

Most locales will format currencies (by default) with 2 decimals, but some with 3, and some with none.

So if the source starts with 
```
0.00 {{This is free today!}}
```
then in some locales this will never match.

Because they would format to `0` or `0.000`. And that's the default. No attributes specified by the developers.

Worse, there are regions using the same language formatting the currency differently, because the local currency has sub-units or not.

So (for example) the Arabic translation would have to have keys for both `0.00` and `0.000`, so that exact match works for various countries.

#### Cons

- No guarantees about interoperability for a relatively core feature.

## Alternatives Considered (`key` matching)

### Standardize the Serialization Forms

Using the design above, remove the integer-only and no-sig-digits restrictions from LDML45
and specify numeric matching by specifying the form of matching `key` values.

> Comparison is as-if by string comparison of the serialized forms, just as in LDML45.

Reviewer 2: Given that this alternative leaves "specifying the form of matching `key` values" as undefined, I can't tell what selecting this alternative would mean. This should be either dropped, or defined more precisely.

Author: I agree that I didn't flesh this out fully, depending instead on the example that we were discussing [just above](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/859#discussion_r1717349732). I will add the details here.

Note well: I'm not married to this as the design, but I'm trying to get at the technical requirements, especially the expectations of message authors (including translators)

Reviewer 2: This still needs resolution.
